Docker desktop (#45)
UoMResearchIT/docker-introduction: _episodes/docker-desktop.md

- "Why can't it replace the cli?"
objectives:
- "Show Docker Desktop and its components."
- "Understand what images and containers are."
- "Visualize the process of image aquisition, container execution and where it ends."
- "Understand the ephimeral nature of containers."
- "Have a glimpse at containers that allow interaction."
- "Understand the importance of cleaning up in docker."
- "Understand the limitations of Docker Desktop."
keypoints:
- "Docker Desktop is a great dashboard that allows us to understand and visualize the lifecycle of images and containers."
- "Images are snapshots of an environment, easily distributable and ready to be used as *templates* for containers."
- "Containers are executions of the images, often with configuration added on top, and usually meant for single use."
- "Running a container usually implies creating a new copy, so it is important to clean up regularly."
- "Docker Desktop could potentially be all you need to use if you only *consume* images out of the box."
- "However, it is very limited in most cases (even for *consumers*), and rarely allows the user to configure and interact with the containers adequately."
---

> **This episode is meant to be instructional, that is, you do not *need* to follow along.**

Reviewer: Instructional implies following to me - perhaps "informational" dunno

We will present the Docker Desktop dashboard, as it will be useful to understand key concepts of docker, such as images and containers.

> However, it is important to note that while it is mostly is free, some features are offered as premium.

Reviewer: premium -> paid upgrades?

premium does not necessarily mean paid to me. "at a premium" I suppose does

Also, it is not fully functional on all operating systems; it can produce conflicts with the docker engine on Linux, for example.

## Getting images

> Setting up docker in windows or mac will have installed Docker Desktop by default.

Reviewer: *Windows *Mac

> Setting up docker in windows or mac will have installed Docker Desktop by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting up docker in Windows or Mac will have installed Docker Desktop by default.
```

If you open the application you will likely see something like this:
![Docker Desktop being opened for the first time.](../fig/docker-desktop/00_lo.gif)
You'll notice that the panel on the left has a tab for 'Images' and another for 'Containers'.
These will be the focus for the episode, and we will ignore most other features.

On the top you'll also find a search icon, which links to Docker Hub,
and allows us to search for the images we saw in the previous episode directly from here.

*Note that there are two tabs, one for containers and one for images.
Make sure that you select the right tab when you search!
![Search window.](../fig/docker-desktop/01_search.png)

> You can search through the name only,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Docker Desktop you can either search by name only,
```

![Search by name.](../fig/docker-desktop/02_search_name.png)

or include the owner. You can then select the tag from the dropdown menu.
![Search with owner and select a tag.](../fig/docker-desktop/03_search_owner%26tag.png)

Once you find the image you were looking for, you can either download it (pull), or directly run it.

We'll start by downloading the latest versions of `hello-world`, `docker/getting-started` and `alpine`.

## Inspecting images
The 'Images' tab on the left panel will show all the images in your system, so you will be able to see them here.
![Images list, hello-world, getting-started and alpine.](../fig/docker-desktop/04_pulled_3.png)

From this tab we can see some information about the images on disk, and run them, but we can also inspect the images.
Clicking on the image will open a window with information on how the image is built, and examine its packages and vulnerabilities.
![Inspecting image hello-world.](../fig/docker-desktop/05_image_inspection.png)

The `hello-world` image does not seem too interesting from here.

> If you go to DockerHub you'll find links to the github site, where you'll see it is not as simpleas it looks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you go to DockerHub you'll find links to the Github site, where you'll see that the image is not as simple as it looks.
```

Nevertheless, this is a very nice and quick way to explore an image.

If we now inspect the `docker/getting-started` image, for example, we can see that it detects some vulnerabilities:
![Inspecting image getting-started.](../fig/docker-desktop/06_image_inspection_gs.png)
You can even further inspect the vulnerable layers by looking at the command
![Inspecting image command in getting-started.](../fig/docker-desktop/07_image_inspection_gs_2.png)

This all looks rather scary, and it is important that we are careful with the images that we download.
It is therefore quite useful to be able to analize them like this.

> This image, in particular, is from a verified publisher (Docker Inc. no less!), and has been downloaded over 10M times, so we'll be safe.

Reviewer: I think this needs further clarification - why are we safe despite the vulnerability?

I'd say the container is likely not malicious but nonetheless comes with vulnerabilities which external actors might exploit

## Running containers

> The images that we just downloaded are inmutable files, they are snapshots of an environment, distributed to be used as *templates* to create 'containers'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The images that we just downloaded are immutable files, they are snapshots of an environment, distributed to be used as *templates* to create 'containers'.
```

The containers are, essentially, images being *run*.
They are executions of the image, and because they are running, they are no longer 'static'.

Let's run the `hello-world` image by either clicking the 'Run' button in the 'Actions' column, from the Images tab.
![Run button from Images tab.](../fig/docker-desktop/08_image_run.png)

A prompt will ask you to confirm 'Run' or modify some optional settings.
![Run confirmation prompt.](../fig/docker-desktop/09_image_run_prompt.png)

> The optional settings allow you to modify the container name, so that you can easily identify it afterwards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The optional settings allow you to modify the running container's name, so that you can easily identify it afterwards.
```

Author: Changed to "container's", but did not include running, as it is not yet running...

  ![Stats tab in container from hello-world image.](../fig/docker-desktop/13_hello_stats.png)
  </article>
</div>
</div>
<br/>
{::options parse_block_html="false" /}

Indeed, if we look carefully, we will find an 'Exited (0)' status under the container name, and a 'Start' button near the top-right corner.
However, if we click on that button we will see the output duplicated in the logs, and the 'Exited (0)' status again.
![Clickling Start on the already run hello-world container.](../fig/docker-desktop/15_hello_start.png)

If we go back to the images tab and run the image again (let's not bother giving it a name this time), we'll see that the same thing hapens.
We get the 'Hello from Docker!', and the container exits.
![Running hello-world image for a second time.](../fig/docker-desktop/16_hello_2.png)

The nature of most containers is *ephimeral*.
They are meant to execute a process, and when the process is completed, they exit.
We can confirm this by clicking on the 'Containers' tab on the left.
This will exit the container inspection and show us all the containers.
Both containers in the list have a status 'Exited'.
![Containers list.](../fig/docker-desktop/17_containers.png)

> Some of you may be wondering why if we have only run the `hello-world` image, you can see there are two containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may be wondering why if we have only run the `hello-world` image, you can see there are two containers.
```
I would feel dumb if I was not one of the some

One of the containers we named, and the other has some gibberish as a name (Docker generated this randomly).
As mentioned before, the *image* is used as a template, and as many *containers* as we want can be created from it.
If we go back to the 'Images' tab and run `hello world` again, we'll see a new container appear.

## Interacting with containers

Not all containers are as short lived as the one we've been using.
If we run the `docker/getting-started` image that we had pulled earlier, we will see something different happen.
You can immediately notice the status under the container name is 'RUNNING' now.
The 'Logs' tab is not too informative, but the 'Inspect' tab already shows more information.

> A process called 'NginX' is running.

Reviewer: is that definitely the right capitalisation?

  </article>
  <article role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="gs_Inspect">
  ![Inspect tab in container from getting-started image.](../fig/docker-desktop/19_gettingstarted_inspect.png)
  </article>
  <article role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="gs_Terminal">
  ![Terminal tab in container from getting-started image.](../fig/docker-desktop/20_gettingstarted_terminal.png)
  </article>
  <article role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="gs_Stats">
  ![Stats tab in container from getting-started image.](../fig/docker-desktop/21_gettingstarted_stats.png)
  </article>
</div>
</div>
<br/>
{::options parse_block_html="false" /}

Before trying to do anything in the terminal, let's look at the container list by clicking on the 'Containers' tab on the left.
You'll see the green icon of the container indicating that it is still live, and indication of how long it's been running for.
![Containers list, getting-started still running.](../fig/docker-desktop/22_gettingstarted_containers.png)

Clicking on the container name again will take us back to the 'Logs' tab in the container.
Lets try and interact with the terminal inside the container.

> If you print the working directory with `pwd` you'll get the base directory: `\`.

Reviewer: wrong / right...?

> You can also list the contents with `ls`, and the `docker-entrypoint` files are a dead giveaway that we are inside the container.

Reviewer: personally would prefer "cat /etc/os-release"

Author: that would work on Alpine, but not in all systems, would it? checking for docker-entrypoint seemed simpler, it does not require explaining what the /etc/os-release is doing...

Reviewer: pretty sure it is standard! maybe there is a place for both... I think I would like to see os-release as it confirms you are using alpine (if they are running linux they can run it on their host too and see that they are different)

At this point this container is very much like a VM.
We can modify things, like for example making a directory with `mkdir`, and see it has been created with `ls` again.
![Terminal, mkdir and ls inside getting-started container.](../fig/docker-desktop/23_gettingstarted_mkdir.png)

But we can do more than that, we can install things. For example, you'll notice that `htop` is not installed.

> Since the `getting-started` image is based on alpine, we can install it using `apk add htop`, and we can now use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the `getting-started` image is based on Alpine, we can install it using `apk add htop`, and we can now use it.
```

</ul>
<div class="tab-content">
  <article role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane active" id="gs_stopped_Terminal">
  ![Terminal tab in container from stopped getting-started image.](../fig/docker-desktop/26_gettingstarted_exited_t.png)
  </article>
  <article role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="gs_stopped_Stats">
  ![Stats tab in container from stopped getting-started image.](../fig/docker-desktop/27_gettingstarted_exited_s.png)
  </article>
  <article role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="gs_stopped_Containers">
  ![Container list after stopping getting-started image.](../fig/docker-desktop/28_gettingstarted_exited_c.png)
  </article>
</div>
</div>
<br/>
{::options parse_block_html="false" /}

Now lets say I want to run the `getting-started` image again. So I go to the 'Images' tab, and click run.
Now lets go to the 'Terminal' tab, and try and find our directory with `ls`. The directory is not there.
We'd also installed `htop`. so lets have a go at running it. Not there either.
![Terminal in fresh getting-started image.](../fig/docker-desktop/29_gettingstarted_2.png)

> If this is not surprising to you, it means you're getting the hang of it.

Reviewer: Personally not a fan of this kind of thing as they make me feel silly if I'm not keeping up

Author: Removed...

When we re-ran the *image*, we created a **new** *container*.
The new container is created from the template saved in the image, and so 'our' changes have banished.
This becomes very clear when we go back to the 'Containers' tab on the left.
We can see that the first container we created from the `getting-started` image is there, next to
the new container (which is still running, by the way).
![Containers after new run of getting-started image.](../fig/docker-desktop/30_gettingstarted_2_containers.png)

## Reviving containers
We *can* get the old container running again, although this is rarely something we'd *want* to do.

> In docker desktop, all we need to do is click on the 'Start' button from the 'Containers' list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Docker Desktop, all we need to do is click on the 'Start' button from the 'Containers' list.
```

> The terminal will appear empty, because it is a new session, but you will even be able to 'recall' commands.

Reviewer: do you mean will not?

Author: I did not... you ***do*** get the command history.

Reviewer: aah ok so what would the equivalent command line be?

> ### TO DO: Change to tabs instead of gifs?

Reviewer: better to put an issue in than have TO DO for me

Author: Those were actually just markers for you, so that you could consider whether a tab or a gift would be better... so I have just removed them...

![Reviving container getting-started.](../fig/docker-desktop/31-32.gif)

## Cleaning up
The `hello-world` image was nice and useful to test docker was working, but it is now rather useless.
If I want to delete it, the 'Images' tab on the left has a convenient bin icon to do so.
Clicking on it will prompt you for confirmation, but it will fail.
### TO DO: Change to tabs instead of gifs?
![Failing to delete image.](../fig/docker-desktop/33-35.gif)

You'll probably notice that the status of the image is 'In use'.

> That seems trange though, given that all the containers from that image excited immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That seems strange though, given that all the containers from that image excited immediately.
```

Lets have a look at the 'Containers' tab. It shows a list of 5 containers now.
Three of them came from the `hello-world` image, and are stopped.
Two of them came from the `getting-started` image, and are running.

We've only been using Docker for 15 minutes though! You may see how this can become a problem...
Particularly so because we were a bit sloppy and did not name the containers.
Let's try and get rid of the containers then.
We can conveniently select them all with the tickbox at the top, and an option to 'Delete' shows up.
Clicking on it will prompt for confirmation, and we can go ahead and accept.

> ### TO DO: Change to tabs instead of gifs?

Reviewer: See above

![Deleting containers.](../fig/docker-desktop/36-38.gif)
All our containers are now gone. Forever.

***Warning:*** You have to be careful here, this action deleted even the containers that were running.
You can filter the containers before you select them "all".

On the up-side, the 'Images' tab shows both the `hello-world` and the `getting-started` images as 'Unused' now.
For docker, an image is 'In use' as long as at least one container has been created from it.
We have just deleted all the containers created from either of these images.
This tells Docker that they are no longer being used, and can therefore be safely deleted.

> ### TO DO: Change to tabs instead of gifs?

Reviewer: See above

![Successfully deleting images.](../fig/docker-desktop/39-42.gif)

## Limitations - Why not Docker Desktop?

We have seen many of the neat and functional bits of Docker Desktop, and it can be mighty appealing,
particularly if you lean towards the use of graphical interfaces.
However, we've not touched on its weaknesses.
We'll just need to point at one to feel the need to throw everything overboard.

Let's go ahead and run the only image we have already pulled, `alpine`.
![Logs tab in container from alpine image.](../fig/docker-desktop/43_alpine.png)

> That was fast, and uneventful.
> Not even a single output to the 'Logs'.
> No way to open a terminal inside Alpine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fast, uneventful.
Not even a line in 'Logs'.
No terminal, sad.
```

Reviewer: Made more haiku
